
Abstract


Introduction

The Electric Curtain (EC) was patented in 1974 by Senichi Masuda for the application of particle control and containment in an electrostatic powder painting booth cite{patent}. The EC is a series of parallel electrodes that are often embedded in a dielectric surface. A standing or traveling wave electric field is created above the surface by applying a multiphase AC power source to the electrodes. The phase difference between electrodes and the wave form of the power source can be chosen allowing for multiple variations in the electric field above the surface without having to alter the physical apparatus.  We will focus on the standing wave or 2-phase EC also know as the 2-phase EC. In this configuration the phase difference between adjacent electrodes is pi radians. If the phase difference between neighboring electrodes is less than pi radians then the field for sinusoidal driving resembles a traveling rotating field. A simple depiction of the EC is shown in figure [1]. 

In our studies of the EC we have experimentally found stable orbits in a 4-phase EC with square wave driving. The stability of the orbit we found was unexpected because it was a traveling field type EC with a highly irregular field due to square wave driving. We have also seen remarkable particle mitigation off of areas affected with a 2-phase field which was originally not thought to transport particles.  In light of these findings we began to research the dynamics of the EC from a chaotic perspective. Our finding of chaos in the standing wave EC show that particle paths are complicated and that the 2-phase EC is capable of dust mitigation for certain parameters. Chaos is also intimately linked to mixing [need citation] and we hope that by understanding the chaotic dynamics of the system we can more carefully understand the conditions necessary for both particle mitigation as well as separation and mixing. Here we comment on our simplified models and show the interesting dynamics they exhibit.

In Masuda's description of the "electric field curtain apparatus" he mentions the ability of the invention to move and separate different types of powders cite{patent}. The EC has been researched in many areas of science and industry because of it's ability to manipulate small particles above a surface. The dynamics presented here support the potential use of the EC for separation and mixing application. Some of the work thats been done in these types of particulate separation applications are: separations of cells in solution cite{blood}, separation of different types of by-products from agricultural processes cite{weiss}, and general particle separation by charge to mass ratio using a variety of different EC designs cite{sepkawamoto08}. We see interesting chaotic dynamics in simplified models of the EC and we hope to apply our findings to the development of the EC as a particle separator and mixer. Our findings suggest that we can improve mixing and separation techniques by taking advantage of unique trajectories in phase space that sensitively depend on particle properties like mass and charge.


Methods Masuda and Kamimura give 3 mathematical models for determining the EC field above the surface cite{masudaapx}. For our calculations we have used the center line charge approximation. This is the simplest approximation that can be used generally for any phase EC as it considers the individual electrodes but as one dimensional wires. As long as we don't allow particle trajectories to intersect the singularities that exist at the electrodes this is a valid method. The work shown here will focus on the 2-phase EC because. The approximation for the 2-phase EC field is shown in equations [1] and [2]. The x axis is perpendicular to the axis of the electrodes and parallel to the surface. The y axis is perpendicular to both the surface and the electrodes.

(Equation)

Where Q is the charge amplitude on an electrode, q and m are the charge and mass of the particle respectively, k is the wave number, and w is the driving frequency.  k determines the wave length of the standing wave and therefore the electrode spacing. For our computations we have set k to one so that electrodes are spaced at intervals of pi. 

This is the first investigation of the chaotic dynamics of the EC so our first calculations and the majority of the work up to this point has revolved around the most fundamental representations of the EC. Primarily we have looked at single particle motion on the surface of the EC. This is what we call the one dimensional (1D) EC because without particle particle interactions the motion is constrained to the x axis. We will also show some work on the two dimensional (2D) EC which considers particle motion off of the surface but as this situation is more complicated we have not studied it as extensively. In both cases we use Poincare sections to simplify the phase space and search for order. In the one dimensional case we have also looked for the onset of chaos by observing period doubling. 

In both the one and two dimensional models we include dissipative forces. For the 1D case we consider rolling friction and Stokes drag. We wrap the Stokes drag coefficient and the coefficient of rolling friction into the same parameter beta. This is allowable because both the drag force and this type of fictional force can be approximated as being proportional to the negative of velocity cite{ballfriction}. In the 2D case we look at perfect reflections about the surface and therefore our dissipation only comes from viscous drag. If the particle settles on the surface we are in the one dimensional case again so we have been careful to clearly separate both cases. The full differential equations we solve for the particle trajectory are then: 

(Equation)

Where j=kqQ/4*pi*epsilon_0 is what we call the interaction amplitude. Obviously for the 1D case we simply set our y value to where we choose the surface to be. In choosing the location of the surface we must realize that the approximation is using one dimensional electrodes and therefore only accurately represents a physical system of cylindrical electrodes if we are some reasonable distance away from them. To insure the electrodes remain "far away" from the particle we have set the surface to a third of the electrode spacing which is valid if our actual system has thin electrodes with spacing much larger than the diameter of the wires. Also to make sure our particle would naturally stay on the surface we restrict ourself to small j. We check for small j by putting the particle directly above an electrode with a repulsive interaction and if the particle is not ejected from the surface then we have insured the gravitational force is greater than the electrostatic repulsion anywhere on the surface. We have used our two dimensional model to determine that j<4 is the appropriate regime for one dimensional dynamics. Even for j above 4 the approximation is eventually appropriate but it takes a noticeable amount of time for the y component of movement to damp out. Because of this we restrict ourselves even more so 0<j<2. In this limited regime we find still find interesting trajectories.

In order to see repetitive behavior across the whole EC we make it periodic. This does not affect the dynamics and is just a tool for observing motions across a periodic system. As mentioned before, our electrodes are spaced at pi intervals so for the 2-phase EC the electrodes are alternating in charge sign at 0, pi, and 2*pi. We make the system periodic by taking modulus 2*pi of the position making the first and last electrodes one and the same. Now we can look at a simplified version of the phase space within these boundaries and see all sets of trajectories. The electric potential oscillates with time so we can also make the system periodic in time.  This is a particularly important feature because in the case of the 1D EC we can have a proper Poincare section by simply strobing the system at the driving frequency. We will describe this in more detail below.

The One Dimensional Electric Curtain

The 2-Phase EC is immediately interesting because as soon as we make the system periodic we notice it has two fixed points. One above each electrode. This means that a particle is placed directly above an electrode in the 1D system it will not move even as the field oscillates in time. The stability of the particle at these locations oscillates with the field. When the charge of the electrode has the same sign of particle the fixed point is unstable because of the repulsion and if we shift the particle from its location directly above that electrode then it will travel away from it. Obviously in the case of opposite signs the particle is attracted to the fixed point and it is this oscillation of stability which makes the system interesting. Chaos is possible in systems that have one stable and one unstable fixed point so qualitatively we can assume interesting dynamics that will arise from these fixed point stability oscillations.

It is often convenient to express a system in terms of a set of first order autonomous differential equations. One of the reasons the 1D EC is a good place to start is because the full "dimensionality" of they system is only three. The independent variables are position, velocity, and time where we do not need the velocity of time as it is a constant but we show it anyway for frugality. Three is the largest dimensionality that can be fully graphically depicted in phase without having make projections. We need to express our system in the form:

(Equation)

Where v is a vector and f(v) is a vector valued function. To express a second order differential equation as a set of first order autonomous differential equations we just need to write the acceleration as the time derivative of velocity. By looking at equation [] we can immediately write:

(Equation)

Where x_1 = x, x_2 = x velocity, and x_3=t. With these expressions it is also very easy to see how to assign the boundaries of the system in a way that can fold all the dynamics into a bounded space. As mentioned before we make the position periodic over the required two adjacent electrodes but we can also make the system periodic over time. Without gravity we do not need to worry about how fast the charge on the electrodes is oscillating relative to how fast a particle may be falling so we can set omega to one and this only affects the size of the time step needed in numerically solving for accurate trajectories. With omega = 1 the electric potential is periodic over 2*pi. We also set beta to be some small fraction of the maximum j being considered. We chose beta = .1. Now We can graphically represent the trajectory of a particle in the full phase space in 3 dimensions. An example of such a trajectory is shown in figure "3D phase space"

subsection:
Poincare Sections

Viewing the trajectory in the full three dimensional space can be a little confusing. The particular orbit shown is chaotic but from this perspective we cannot immediately see if there is any order to it. A Poincare section of the orbit is a plane through phase space where we only plot the intersection of the obit with the plane. In addition we only plot points where the trajectory is traveling in same direction through the plane. The plane of choice and the direction through the plane chosen may be ambiguous but a particular decision is apparent. The particle is only going one direction in time so a cross section of figure "3D phase space" perpendicular to the time axis and parallel to both the position and velocity axes is guaranteed to be a Poincare section. For this particular trajectory we have also shown the Poincare section in figure "Poincare Section"

We chose this trajectory because it is clearly a strange attractor. If we were to zoom in on a particular section it would exhibit self similarity. Seeing this fractal is very exciting because it shows that the 1D EC dynamics for this set of parameters is chaotic but ordered. The self similarity on any scale of observation allows for two particles infinitesimally close in phase space to diverge exponentially but still maintain a path who's trajectory is somewhat predictable. We know that for a variety of initial conditions that a particle will settle into a path such that all points of intersection are a subset of the fractal shown. A nice feature of this example is that experimentally this particular Poincare is easy to make. We are taking a slice at one time throughout each period of the driving which is the same thing as strobing the system at the driving frequency and then recording the particles velocity and position. We hope to verify some of our computations by doing just that. One of the benefits of the 1D EC is the ability to view the full phase space graphically. When we look at particle movement off the surface we end up with 5 first order autonomous equations. We then have to carefully choose how to project and slice the phase space to get useful information.

subsection:
Bifurcations

One of the ways of determining the onset of chaos and quantifying the dynamics of a system is with bifurcation diagrams. Bifurcation diagrams are particularly easy to make for one dimensional systems and we have uncovered some interesting dynamics by looking for period doubling. For this system it is easy to imagine that when j is just above zero we will have some small periodic oscillation in between or about the electrodes. Indeed for small coefficients (j<.207) we find a periodic orbit that is directly in phase with the driving frequency. In other words if we strobe the system at the driving frequency we will see the particle at a single point. In the case of our Poincare section this corresponds to the particle trajectory passing though the cross section plane in exactly the same place every time. To make a bifurcation diagram we simply collapse the system further. By projecting the longterm Poincare section onto the x axis we can then change j, make another projection onto the position axis, and plot many of these projections as a function of j. When one point splits into two this corresponds to the orbit picking up some extra behavior that changes the period to twice that of the previous. We still strobe at the same frequency but now it shows the particle in two alternating positions.

One might imagine that the fist stable orbit will be the oscillation of the particle between two electrodes especially if the initial conditions in phase space are an initial velocity of zero and an initial position between two of the electrodes. This is not the case. Instead we find that the orbit always migrates two one of the two electrodes. If, however, we turn off damping the orbit periodically wanders forever.  Originally we imagined a period doubling transition being possible because we thought of a stable oscillation around one electrode being perturbed by the surrounding electrodes. We do see the smooth transition to a period two orbit initially but then something very strange happens after the first bifurcation.

There is a sudden jump to a period 4 orbit before collapsing back into period two as shown in figure "first Bifurcation Diagram".  Because bifurcation diagrams can have self similar properties we thought this was just a very quick segment of period doubling with a very fast relaxation as well. As we zoomed in on the transition from period 2 to 4 we found that it was completely discontinuous. We are still working on figuring out this discontinuity and its physical explanation. We also see that the period 4 orbit appears to split but this is not the case. It strictly remains period 4 but for different j the "location" of the orbit jumps. The reader will see that every blank spot in what should be a continuous line corresponds to an occupied location in the "other" period 4 orbit. Aside from creating an interesting bifurcation diagram this is interesting when considering applications. Two particles with slightly different charge to mass ratios in the same 2-phase field will have very different trajectories if we tune the system such that the value of one particles j sits in the period two regime and the other particles j is in the period 4. With this discontinuity two particle may only be perturbatively different to exhibit completely different oscillations.  

This strange period doubling and hopping is made even more interesting by the fact that the transition to chaos is also unusually abrupt. When a system exhibits period doubling behavior the onset of chaos happens when the cascade of doubling leads to an orbit of infinite period. In our case we see period doubling but chaos seams to appear at arbitrary j which happens more frequently as we approach j=.26 shown in figure "Second Bifurcation Diagram". Then at j=.26 it looks as if the period goes from period 8 to chaos. Because we can not currently illuminate the reasons for these strange transitions we will not comment any further on the oddities found. We will however say that in the second transition to chaos shown in "Third Bifurcation Diagram" here is a slightly more traditional bifurcation but the transition still looks to be discontinuous.  

Two Dimensional EC

As mentioned above the model we have for the 1D EC looses it's validity when j>4 because the particle may leave the surface. The increased complexity of the 2D system makes it harding to find interesting features analogous to those in the 1D model so we have not completed our work in searching for bifurcations and detailed proper Poincare.  Qualitatively some of our phase space trajectories look extremely similar to those found in the 1D model especially when the particle is not traveling far from the surface. It is comforting to know that perhaps the 1D model approximately represents the 2D system for some set of the 2D parameter space above j=4. As we have already shown the interesting features of the 1D model we will not continue to discuss similarities but rather show some unique features when we include motion above the surface. Shown in figure "x Poincare section" and "y Poincare section" are Poincare sections perpendicular to the time axis and parallel to the x and y phase planes respectively. The mess of points below and around the solid rings are preliminary particle movements before it settles into the basin of attraction. We have verified this by looking at the long term behavior of the trajectories and seeing that eventually each intersection of these planes belongs to the set of points in the rings. The preliminary points are shown here so the we can see how long it takes for the orbit to settle into the basin of attraction (the rings). Also the reader may have noticed that the y positions in the y, y velocity plane are below the surface which is set to be at y=1. In order to deal with the discontinuity of the surface it was easiest to fold the motion of the bounce below the surface. The dynamics are not lost and it would be easy to map the fold the motion "below the surface" back above it but it would make the Poincare section look messy.

These images very exciting because even though it appears to be a solid basin of attraction in both the x and y phase spaces the boundary of the attractor looks like it could be fractal in nature. This is a very unique attractor and we are happy to see order in the 2D model even when it is far outside the realm of being approximated with the 1D model. This is about the extent of our findings for motion in two dimensions but when you increase the dimensionality of the space you are not guarantied to have predictable behavior in the long term solutions but because we see this we know it is worth continuing our search for novel dynamics in even more realistic models.  

Conclusion

Looking at simple representations of the EC has exposed the possibility of unique and perhaps useful chaotic dynamics in the actual physical system. By using Poincare sections we observe strange attractors in both the one and two dimensional systems. By using bifurcation diagrams to look at orbits in the 1D EC we have shown interesting and perhaps useful period doubling phenomenon with a spontaneous onset of chaos. The attractors found in the 2D system have not only shown an interesting basin of attraction but have shown us that the more realistic depiction of the EC also has potential for novel behavior. We hope to continue our research of the simple 2D model as well as include more complicated surface interactions and eventually inter particle interactions to develop the EC as a tool to be used for particle mixing, separation and mitigation.




